---
layout: post
title:  "White Lung's new album is really something"
date:   2016-09-01 09:11:03
categories: news
img: http://cdn3.pitchfork.com/albums/23189/homepage_large.b88066c8.jpg
---
Although White Lung sprung from the Vancouver underground, they've never been shy about their ambition. "We'll celebrate breaking even after every single [self-booked] tour," frontwoman Mish Barber-Way wrote prior to the release of their second album, 2012's Sorry. "And that's totally okay with me." With Paradise, their fourth, they've talked about exploring a new pop sensibility, versus "this really stupid attitude that only punks have where it's somehow uncool to become a better songwriter." Barber-Way took singing lessons; they embraced "accessible." None of which, thankfully, has pared down Kenneth William's tar-spitting guitars, Anne-Marie Vassiliou's breakneck drumming, or their powerslide dynamic.

If anything, there's more of a spotlight on those things now. Over time, the Canadian thrashers have increasingly allowed space to let the pop potential of their songs shine through. After the sparking Catherine wheel sound of their last album, 2014's excellent Deep Fantasy, and its predecessors, the production on Paradise is roomy by comparison; convincingly stadium-sized, and billowing with dry ice, a touch indebted to pop's cavernous post-Steve Lillywhite moment. Having ruined her voice on the Deep Fantasy tour, Barber-Way now sings at a gothy remove rather than a throat-mangling shred. "Narcoleptic" chimes with dark, glassy synth-like guitars, and in "Hungry" and "Below," they've written two genuinely affecting power ballads that don't scrimp on attack or scream-'til-it-hurts hooks.

On Deep Fantasy, Barber-Way tackled body dysmorphia and addiction, and wrote bracing indictments of rape culture and the violent and insidious ways it affects society, from outright assault ("I Believe You") to the ongoing fear of getting your drink spiked in a club ("Down It Goes"). Unsurprisingly, it was often labeled a "feminist punk record." Which it was—and an important one, too—but however many years on we are from feminism's big mainstream moment, the term has become a suffocating expectation of art made by women: that honoring the sisterhood must surely be their only intention, that their politics are their identity, rather than the other way around, and should they make any move deemed un-feminist, they better line up at the nearest Twitter stake post-haste. White Lung are never a band to follow expectations, and Barber-Way has always expressed disdain for the concept of a singular feminism. As if to celebrate that, on Paradise, she follows the lead of an artist who initially confounded her own ideas of female power and agency.

In 2014, Barber-Way grappled with her appreciation of Lana Del Rey's Ultraviolence in a review for the Talkhouse. At first, she wrote, she had to separate the "Video Games" singer from her art because she found her "annoying." But over repeated listens, Barber-Way arrived at a revelation: "LDR is always searching for herself through someone else and sometimes she hits the mark and embodies the character perfectly." On Paradise (coincidentally or not, also the name of an EP by LDR), Barber-Way, who is now based in Los Angeles, shifts between her own perspective and various other female points of view, all of which offer provocative challenges to the idea of what it means to be a Good Feminist.

In one sense, it's a writing exercise: As a journalist in her own right, she's often written about marrying a "motorcycle-riding, Southern-born hick from Arkansas," and that she'd like little more than to abandon her career and escape to the country with him. It's a prospect she says is considered "grossly basic" in her punk peer group—and a happy one that "doesn't make for the best songwriting." But the one spot on Paradise where she tries it explicitly is awesome: It's the subject of the title track, a ride-or-die pounder with a killer chorus where she yearns for her husband to "ride south with me now." She sneers, "I'm all about you/You're all about me too," before asking anyone who cares to challenge her dream, "Oh, is that oppressive? No." A couple of songs seem to deal with getting over the addictions that she's mentioned in the past; what is Paradise if not exerting control over a totally personal environment?

Among Barber-Way's characters are two real-life serial killers. On "Sister," she sings as Karla Homolka, the wife of Paul Bernardo, who at the end of the 1980s became known as the "Ken and Barbie killers" thanks to a spree of murders in Scarborough, Canada—including Homolka's sister, Tammy. "You'll burn a bit/My little sister," Barber-Way sings, over intricate, trebly guitar. On "Demented" Barber-Way imagines a fight between British serial killers Rosemary and Fred West over their mutually assured destruction, echoed by what sounds like a wall of death race around the tip of a volcano. These songs are schlocky, but they serve as part of a deeper inquiry into how we perceive and attribute female desire and agency—female serial killers get shorter sentences than their male equivalents, because it's harder for anyone to believe they'd do it.

Barber-Way has called the sharp-edged "Kiss Me When I Bleed," whose chorus feels like mudsliding through a ring of fire, her riches-to-rags white-trash fairytale. "I will give birth in a trailer," she whines with stubborn pride, singing as a girl caught up with what her family think is the wrong kinda guy. This isn't about bullshit "choice feminism" or "empowerment," but offers a demanding characterization of the battles Barber-Way waged with herself over her own decisions, and one that asks that we examine our own responses: Do we sneer? Why?

Barber-Way wastes no time dismantling the traditional yardsticks of female worth, the rigged games of beauty ("Below") and fame ("Hungry"), and the Republican-endorsed concept of female bodies as pliant reproductive vessels. "Spare your good seed," she laments in a layered, robotic yowl on the hyper-speed "Dead Weight," "I'm getting bored and old." Deep Fantasy screamed itself black and blue fighting back against a culture of oppression. On Paradise, Barber-Way steps outside of her own body and the assaults it sustains, and creates a searing portrait of what it can look like to love without fear, even when that love doesn't resemble the fantasy we've been sold.
